UK C&C It was expected by many, me included but more importantly UKOGA and a couple of the bigger oil and gas consultancies, that UK offshore oil production would increase significantly from 2017 to exceed 1000 kbpd for the yearly average in 2018. So far this is proving a bit of a challenge. March production was 934 kbpd, down 7 percent m-o-m and 2 percent y-o-y (but up 0.8 percent for the first quarter compared with 2017). It’s possible that some fields have not reported but those showing zero for the month are not big producers. The biggest single field drop came from Clair but most field saw declines, even the newer ones. Jodi data indicates there will be a rise in May, but not above 1000 kbpd, and after that there is usually a summer dip because of maintenance shutdowns (plus this year some strikes at Total platforms).  (Click to enlarge) Two of the largest oil producers, Buzzard and the Golden Eagle Area Development, both operated by Nexen, have started accelerated decline following increasing water breakthrough (especially noticeable in GEAD over the past year). The newest large field is Scheihallion. This is a redevelopment with its neighbouring field, Loyal, through the Glen Lyon FPSO (also called the Quad 204 project), which was started last year. So far the combined decline in Buzzard and GEAD has exceeded growth in Scheihallion. The Clair Ridge platforms, which also exploit the heavy oil in the Clair field, were installed last year but there have been multiple delays and production is not now expected until later this year. Once it is ramped up, which could take three or four years despite it having some predrilled wells, it will be the largest producer at 100 to 120 mmbpd and has an eight-year plateau, while Scheihallion/Loyal will plateau and decline quickly.  (Click to enlarge) Pierce and Captain are heavy oil developments. Pierce was redeveloped in 2009 and Captain has recently switched to using polymer injection to improve the water flood performance. Heavy oil projects require many wells, tend to produce high water cuts from the outset and have low recovery factors. Clair and Clair ridge are mentioned above. Kraken was a heavy oil start-up in June last year, it has the largest water processing capacity in the UK North Sea and has already seen water at 60 to 65 percent. Mariner is another due to start later this year for Statoil, it uses condensate for EOR, and there are other heavy oil prospects like Bressay (cancelled by Statoil when the oil price collapsed) and Bentley.  (Click to enlarge) Another reason for the possibly lower than expected total production is early decline in many of the smaller producers started up from late 2015 through 2017. For example the P10 production plan for Scolty & Crathes had over 7,000 bpd average in 2018 and a decline out to 2032, but the current production is around 3,000 bpd and declining, all from Crathes as the Scolty field expired after about four months. Similarly, Solan was predicted to average around 18,000 bpd in 2017 but achieved 10,000 bpd only briefly and is now below 5,000 and declining. UK NATURAL GAS 