A Breakthrough Clean Technology Is Giving One Tiny Company the Power To Extract $25 Oil In A $70 World. Now Petroteq Energy Inc. (TSX:PQE.V; OTC:PQEFF) Is Gearing Up To Take The Energy Industry By Storm!  The Technology - Heavy oil is a dirty word in the energy industry. But that could all be about to change. Petroteq has pioneered a proprietary clean EOR (Enhanced Oil Recovery) technology to solve the problem of dirty oil sands extraction. It cheaply extracts 99 percent of all hydrocarbons, without producing any greenhouse gases. The Property - At their Asphalt Ridge project, they have an estimated 86 million barrels of “trapped” heavy oil equivalent worth $5.2 billion. Thanks to their extraction breakthrough, they’re aiming to harvest this resource for as little as $25 per barrel. The Big Picture - There are over 1 trillion barrels of “trapped” heavy oil in Utah, Colorado and Wyoming, not to mention trillions more worldwide. Petroteq is filing patents around the world, and their licensing opportunity is enormous. In the epic battle between OPEC and the U.S. for global market share - low cost producers are set to reap a stunning energy investor windfall. We’re focusing on one little company - Petroteq Energy Inc. (TSX:PQE.V; OTC:PQEFF) - which is unlocking trapped oil in U.S. oil sands for as little as $25/barrel. Technology is their key advantage. Their patented Liquid Extraction System is the first ever tech to generate production from Utah’s 32-billion-barrel heavy oil resource. It extracts over 99 percent of all hydrocarbons in the sand, generates zero greenhousegases and doesn’t require high temperatures or pressures. In Asphalt Ridge—Petroteq has an estimated 86 million barrels of oil equivalent worth $5.2 billion at today’s prices. The cost of production is expected to come in at only $25 a barrel. The plan is to reach 5,000 bpd by 2019 at a cost of production as low as $18 per barrel for some portions of the project. There’s potential, says Petroteq, to achieve 30,000 bpd with proven reserves. And, that isn’t even their biggest opportunity. Petroteq’s technology could generate huge licensing fees around the world, and it is eyeing the opportunity to file patents in all countries with oil sands reserves. They’re not only targeting the 1 trillion-plus barrels of oil in sands in Utah, Colorado and Wyoming, but through potential licensing deals, the trillions of barrels worth of trapped oilsands potential everywhere around the world.